 
Hello, hello, hello, hello. Thank you, thank you, thank you. It's good to be back in Erie. I want to say hello to all of Erie. But mainly Mr.Mayor, City Council President Horton, and all local elected leaders who are joining us here today. And to your next Senator, Julie. We need to turn out and support for Democrats down the line here in Pennsylvania and win back that Pennsylvania state Senate. Folks, look. I want to thank you President McManus for coming out, you've been a good friend a long time. And for everyone at the UA for hosting this incredible training facility. I'm so grateful to have earned UA's endorsement. You have over 355 proud plumbers, pipe fitters, and more behind me then I can possibly thank you for.

 
Also, want to thank Rick for sharing his story with us today. And for being part of a conversation this year where he shared a story with America. And Rick, Delaware is thought of as being a great corporate entity, and chemical facilities, and all those things. But we have a $4 billion, as you probably well know, agricultural industry in the Delmarva Peninsula. It's a big deal and a lot of farmers are being hurt really badly, really badly. Farmers all across the country have been gutted by the president's broken promises and reckless trade war. But our farmers, just like our union members and anyone who actually does an honest day's work, see him and his promises for what they are. Rick, I want to thank you. And I think you put it best in the op-ed you wrote last year. You said, "It's a bunch of hot air and cold wind."

 
Folks, this is it. Election's here. The choice couldn't be more stark. The stakes couldn't be higher. So many Pennsylvanians are facing hard times right now. After my debate in Cleveland last week I took a train. That's what I've ridden a lot, an Amtrak train. From northeastern Ohio into Pittsburgh and Greensburg, Latrobe, Johnstown. And I heard the same stories everywhere, I've been hearing all around the country. You're trying your best but it never feels like enough. You're not looking for a handout. You're just looking for a fair shot. That's how my dad felt when we had to leave Scranton after it was no work, when coal died. He was in sales, he wasn't a guy who was in the coal mines. Although my great-grandfather was, they tell me, the first Irish Catholic State Senator ever elected in the state of Pennsylvania, and he was a mining engineer. But I remember him saying he made that walk, which a lot of you know here in Erie.

 
I call it the longest walk any parent has to make up a short flight of stairs to tell his kids we can't play in that ball camp, can't play in Green Ridge Little League anymore. You can't go to St.Paul's, you got to leave. Dad doesn't have a job. I'm going to have to leave. I remember him taking us home, my mom and three children at the time, home to my grandpop's. And I don't know how much pride it must've cost him to ask my grandfather, "Will you take care of Jean and the kids? I'll be back." And he started commuting every weekend 157 miles down to Delaware where he had grown up. We ended up in a steel town called Claymont, Delaware. Then we went to Wilmington. My dad got a sales job and he worked hard. Took about four years to build a decent middle class life and be able to buy a home.

 
But it wasn't easy for him, but he had an expression. He said, "Joey, I don't expect the government to solve my problems, but I at least expected them to understand my problems." America deserves a president who understands what people are going through. You're facing real challenges right now. And the last thing you need is a president who exacerbates them. More than 210,000 are dead, as was pointed out. We lose anywhere from 700 to a thousand people a day, dead. The president was told a little while ago… When he was told a 100,000 people a day were dying, you know what he said? He says, "It is what it is." Well, it is what it is because he is who he is. More than 7.5 million Americans have been infected, and counting. 175,000 cases right here in Pennsylvania. My heart goes out to all those families who, like any of us have lost a child's spirit, look at that empty chair at the dining room table tonight where somebody you love used to sit.

 
My heart goes out to everyone struggling in this economic crisis. Simple neglect on the part of this administration. There're 11 million jobs lost since the beginning of this crisis and still have not come back. Temporary layoffs have turned into permanent layoffs. We're still down 674,000 manufacturing jobs nationwide since the crisis started, and more than 40,000 manufacturing jobs here in Pennsylvania. The Trump presidency will be the first presidency since Hoover that is going to end up leaving office with fewer jobs than when he came into office. Since Hoover. But President Trump has laid… He talks about this V recovery. We went down real quick, we're coming up quick. Well, that's what you call a K-shape recovery. Those folks on the top of the K are doing very, very well. Recession at the top, those folks, everything's going up for them. But everybody in the middle and below is going down, seeing things get worse.

 
It means essential workers who sacrificed to keep us going through this pandemic are being left behind by the most unequal recovery in American history. And it means while the top… This is a fact, which is startling to me when I found it out. The top 100 billionaires, in the middle of this pandemic they made $300 billion additional dollars. Hear me now? 100 individuals made $300 billion this year. And what'd the bottom half get? They got the K, they got the slide down. Because the fact is, the President can only see the world from Park Avenue. I see it from Scranton. I see it from Claymont, for real. You all know what I'm talking about. You all see it from Erie. That's why my program to build back better is focused on working people.

 
Think about it. Think about all the people you know who got up this morning and had the following conversation. "Honey, I know we need four new tires, they're bald. But we can't do it now, we got to wait. You got to wait." Or "I know we just lost our insurance, but we're going to be okay. We're going to hang in there." Or having to make a choice, literally a choice, between getting the prescription or putting food on the table. If I said to that 10 years ago you'd look at me like I was writing a fiction story, but that's the truth. Those are decisions people are making today, right now.

 
Independent analysis put out by a highly respected Wall Street firm of all things, Moody's from Wall Street firm, projects that my build back better plan's going to create 18.6 million jobs in four years. That's harder now. That's not a liberal think tank, that's Moody's. And it's going to create seven million more jobs than the president's economic plan. And a trillion dollars more in economic growth than the president's plan. And here's how it works, I'm going to raise taxes. I'm not going to raise taxes on anybody making less than $400K, but you won't pay a penny more. But those making more than that, I'm going to ask them to finally begin to pay the fair share. I'm going to ask the big corporations and the wealthy to begin to pay. 91 of the fortune 500 companies today pay zero tax. You hear me? Zero tax. How many of you pay zero tax? And billionaires are paying at a tax rate… Because it's all investment money, they're paying a lower tax rate than you pay if you have a job as a plumber.

 
How can that be? So I'm going to raise. The money I'm going to raise, we're going to allow us to invest in working people and grow the middle-class back, and make sure everyone comes along this time. My plan is about making the kinds of investments that are going to stimulate economic growth. To get it back to full employment fast and help us build back better than before. We're going to create millions of good paying union jobs. I had the honor of being the guy in charge of the Recovery Act when the Great Recession occurred. The president turned to me, he used to love doing it at State of the Union messages. He'd never tell me what he was going to do. And he turns, says "And Joe, sheriff Joe's going to take care of that $800 billion."

 
Well, we got it done less than two tenths of 1% waste or fraud. And we built back the longest expansion in American history. Manufacturing and technology, making sure we're going to make the future made in America. And infrastructure, building: airports, schools, affordable housing, upgrading the water and pipes. Making sure it's sustainable and resilient, built, laid down by union plumbers and pipe fitters here in Pennsylvania and across the country. And clean energy, we're going to upgrade four million buildings with weatherization of two million homes. And it's estimated that'll create one million good paying jobs, union jobs. Union jobs to be filled by men and women like in this local here. Look folks, we're in a situation now where if you take a look at this build back better… I'm going to take a second. But I hope I don't take too many seconds before it rains here.

 
Number one, we were talking about it, Mr.President, a little while ago. He promised an infrastructure plan in 2016, '17, '18, '19. He didn't do a damn thing. Not one single bit. He promised to relieve main street slammed by the recession. But guess where that money went, that the Congress passed? It went into the Mar-a-Lago crowd, the wealthy. See, I'm not joking. It didn't go to small businesses. It didn't go to the people that needed it. My plan to revitalize American manufacturing infrastructure says we're going to use by American. We're supposed to be only buying American now.

 
Well, I'm going to invest $2 trillion in infrastructure and clean energy. We're going to raise over $3.7 trillion by eliminating that tax cut for the super wealthy. And folks, we're going to: fix water pipes, pipelines, replace lead pipes, upgrade treatment plants. We're going to construct 1.5 million new affordable housing units. We're going to build a $100 billion dollars rebuilding our schools. We're going to retrofit, which we started in our administration, 4 million buildings; including advanced heating and cooling system. There's going to be such a race to job creation for unions that you're not going to believe it, and I really mean this. And by the way, when I did the Recovery Act, which is $800 billion, not one… We had the largest infrastructure project short of Eisenhower's Interstate Highway Program; since that.

 
Not one single solitary dollar went to anything other than a prevailing wage. Had to be a prevailing wage. Look, I'm also going to make sure that corporate America being so kind, wanting to take over registered apprenticeships… You know what that's all about? You guys spend a quarter billion dollars a year making sure that you have apprenticeships that are the best trained people in the world. Well folks, I'm also going to pass the PRO Act. They're spending over $2 billion a year trying to keep you from being able to organize around the country. That's a promise. And also strengthen labor standards, especially OSHA rules. There's a lot we can do, but it's not enough to praise workers. We got to make sure they get benefited.

 
Folks, look, my dad had another expression. After he lost his job, we moved to Delaware. He'd say, "Joey, a job's about a lot more than a paycheck. It's about your dignity. It's about respect. It's about your place in the community. It's about being able to look your kid in the eye and say, ‘Honey, it's going to be okay.'" The fact is that every time the word climate change comes up Donald Trump thinks hoax. Every time it comes up, I think jobs. Let me be clear, no matter how many lies he tells, I am not, not, not banning fracking; period. We'll also increase incomes. We're going to see the burden and the cost with an increased 50, we're going to make sure. Not prevailing wage. We can't mandate that, you guys. By the way, I said inside, the other expression my dad had was, "There's only one way to deal with the abuse of power." Which corporate America is exercising now. "It's with power." And the only power we have is union power. You're the guys that keep the ball bearings on the other side of the gate from taking everything, and that's a fact.

 
So look, I'll try to move along quickly here. The fact is that we not ease the burden on the major costs in your life. What's the average middle-class person fear most? They're trying to tear down the Affordable Care Act. We're going to build on it, adding a new health insurance option. A not-for-profit public option, which is going to give private insurers real competition. We're going to increase the subsidies so premiums are lower and we can afford plans with lower deductibles and lower out-of-pocket expenses. Because we're going to be able to do that with the money we take back from the super wealthy. We're going to take on the pharmaceutical companies with a plan that slashes the cost of prescription drugs by 60%.

 
Look folks, we're going to work with states to ensure that every three, four, and five year old has access to free high quality preschool, not daycare. You send them to preschool, there's evidence of 58% of them will go all the way through. No matter what their background. No matter what poor school, poor neighbor they come from. You start them at age three, they have a 58% better chance of graduating all the way through high school and beyond. We're going to make sure the low and middle income families will never have to spend more than 7% of their income caring for their young. What's the comp… Talk to the women around here. I was a single dad for five years. I couldn't afford help. I thank God I had my mom, and my sister, and my brother to help me with my kids when my wife and daughter were killed.

 
We're going to make four year public college and universities tuition free for families making less than $125,000 a year. And when Erie gets his first new community college to open in Pennsylvania in 27 years, we're going to make sure that it's free for anyone who qualifies to get in. That's a fact. And by the way, that costs a lot of money. That costs $6 billion a year. That's about as much as we give a tax deduction for race horses. I mean this, we got to have priorities.

 
If you're buying your first home? Look at all people who've gotten out of school since the 9/11 generation. Where they got out of high school without a graduation. Where they got out of college, no graduations. Where they thought they had these good jobs waiting for them, but they all got shut down in the Great Recession. And now, what are they doing? They're unable to make that first home down payment. They're out there busting their neck. And a lot of them are college graduates, some of them are beyond that. Some of have their graduate degrees and no jobs, or no access. Well, I'm going to make sure you get a tax credit for up to $15,000 for your first time home buyer; period. That's going to provide you a down payment. We're going to protect social security, increase benefits for millions of seniors. So he can retire with dignity in some respect.

 
Folks look, but if we're going to get anything done, we've got to come together. We're going to have to vote like we've never voted before. Early voting is open here in Pennsylvania. So go vote if you can. And go to IWillVote.com/pa to find out when and where you can vote early. And if you requested a mail in ballot, return it as soon as possible. Make sure you seal it first in the secrecy envelope, and then sign the declaration on the outside of the envelope before you return it. As I said early this week on the sacred grounds of Gettysburg battlefield, I'm running as a proud Democrat, but I'm going to govern as an American president. I'm going to work as hard for those who don't support me as those who do.

 
And I'm so proud in this campaign to have earned the support of so many proud and patriotic Republicans, including Pennsylvania's former governor and secretary of Homeland Security, Tom Ridge. I want to thank him publicly for his endorsement. We may not in everything. We agree on this. This is a moment to put country above party. Because after all this country's been through, after all that America has accomplished, after all the years we've stood as a beacon for the rest of the world. It cannot be that here in the year 2020 we'll allow the government of the people, by the people, and for the people, to perish on this earth; as Lincoln said. We can do better. We can do better than what we've seen. We can be what we are at our best, the United States of America.

 
All this division being pushed by this president, all this stuff about encouraging… Here in the debate we had I ask him to condemn the Proud Boys. He said, "Stand back and stand down, but stand ready." What's going on here? This is not who we are. This is not who we are as a country, for real. We can argue like hell, but end of the day we come together. I am more optimistic about America's chances today than I ever been. Why? Because I think the blinders have been taken off, people have realized what's really at stake here. I think we can pull this together. I'm optimistic. I really genuinely am.

 
 

 
Well, I'll tell you what. My dad was an automobile man. I got through school, and we got through being able to eat after he lost his job up in Scranton, Pennsylvania. He had to move down to Delaware, because selling General Motors products. So I've known, and my state used to have the largest percentage of auto workers of any state in the nation, because we had a small population and the largest General Motors and largest Chrysler plant outside of Michigan and Ohio. I saw what happened when we got hit very hard. We've lost both those plants.

 
Well, let me start off by saying, Mr. Mayor, thanks for the passport into your city, and Marcy, you've been a friend a long time. Thank you for your introduction. There's no more fierce defender. There's no more fierce defender, the people she grew up with, than Marcy. She has never, ever, ever forgotten where she came from. She's tough. She's a straight shooter. She's influential in Congress. She's honest, and she sees you. You're always in her view.

 
 

 
This lesson I grew up with, surrounded by hard work and families in Scranton and then in Claymont, Delaware, where we had to move when Dad lost work. There was no work in Scranton, just like here in Toledo, but the times are hard. Unemployment is way up due to the pandemic and the terrible way in which it's been handled. The economic outlook remains uncertain. Across Ohio and the country, folks are worried about making their next mortgage payment or their rent payment, whether or not they can purchase their prescription drugs or be able to put food on the table, literally worried about whether their kids' schools open and be able to stay open and, if they're not open, how they can go to work, if they have a job, and still take care of their kids.

 
They see the people at the very top doing better than they ever have while they're left to wonder, "Who's looking out for me?" That's Donald Trump's presidency, 215,000 dead because of COVID. Experts say we're likely to lose another 200,000 people in the next few months unless we take some serious action. He doesn't know what he's doing, all because this president's only worried about one thing: the stock market. They refuse to follow the science. It's estimated that if we just wore these masks nationally, we'd save over 100,000 lives between now and the end of the year.

 
This president knew back in January. He was briefed in detail by the intelligence community how extremely dangerous this COVID virus was, how communicable the disease was. He went on a taped interview with Bob Woodward, a leading journalist. It's on tape. It's been played, telling Woodward that he knew how dangerous the disease was, but did nothing. Ask yourself, "Why didn't he tell us? Why didn't he warn us?" He said nothing. He told Woodward he didn't want it panic the American people. That's why he said nothing.

 
We don't panic. America doesn't panic. But Trump panicked. His reckless personal conduct since his diagnosis has been unconscionable. The longer Donald Trump is President, the more reckless he seems to get. Dr. Fauci, the most respected doc on this issue in the world, in the country, he told the president … You know the president's announcement of his pick for the Supreme Court in the Rose Garden? He's referred to that as a super spreader. All those people got the disease.

 
How's he responding? Well, guess what? He's now running an ad you probably saw, a national ad quoting Dr. Fauci out of context. Way back in March, referring to public health officials, Dr. Fauci said, "I can't imagine that anybody could be doing more," end of quote. In the recent ad that's going out nationally, Trump quotes Dr. Fauci is saying that about him, the president. Trump and his campaign deliberately lied, making it sound like Fauci was talking about Trump. Fauci went on to the public air when the ad came out saying, three days ago, "I did not get permission for that quote." He wasn't referring to the president.

 
Even after that, Fauci said he didn't say that. The president and the campaign, even after Fauci laid this out, the campaign said, "We're still going to use it, because he did say it, even though it wasn't about him." The point I'm trying to make is it was a knowing lie, like we're being told about everything about this COVID consequences. As a consequence, through his months of overwhelming lying, misleading and irresponsible action on the part of Donald Trump, how many empty chairs were around your breakfast table this morning? Someone you love, somebody you cared about, someone you knew, a family member or a neighbor, missing, missing. Why? Because of negligence.

 
Look, I view this campaign, as I've said before and I'll say it again, between Scranton and Park Avenue, between Toledo and Park Avenue. All Trump can see from Park Avenue is Wall Street. That's why his only metric for American prosperity that he values is the Dow Jones and the index. Like a lot of you, I spent a lot of my time with guys like Trump looking down on me, the Irish Catholic kid in the neighborhood, guys who thought they were better than me because they had a lot of money, guys who inherited everything they ever got and still managed to squander it.

 
 

 
Folks, I know what it takes to be President. I sat next to a man for eight years, watching and participating. My mom taught me what you're probably taught by your parents, too. She said, "Joey, nobody is better than you, but everybody's your equal."

 
I don't measure people based on the size of their bank account. I don't respect people based on whether they own a mansion. I don't judge them based on whether they belong to a country club. You and I measure people by the strength of their character, their honesty, their courage, their courage. My mom used to say, "The greatest gift of all, the greatest virtue is courage. You're redeemed by your courage." That's what she'd say, and redeemed by your loyalty, honesty, loyalty, things that are bigger than yourself or the neighborhoods we were raised in.

 
It's all about family, decency, honor, opportunity. These are the values I learned growing up in Scranton, my guess is you learn growing up in Toledo, wherever you grew up. The people I grew up with in Scranton didn't have any money in stocks. In our house, growing up, every penny my dad made went to paying the bills, keeping the lights on and food on the table. Every penny our friends in Scranton made went to paying the bills and taking care of their families as well. We looked out for our neighbors.

 
That's why I have a different measure by which I judge the health of America's economy. I see hardworking women and men who are just trying to earn an honest living and take care of their families, just want an even shot. They're not asking for anything. They're just asking for a fair shot, and given a shot, the American people will never, ever, ever, ever let their country down, never.

 
The other expression my dad would have, he'd say, "When you see the abuse of power, there's only one way to respond to it, and that's with power." The only power we have to take on corporate America is union power. That's the only power. I just think back to 2008, when Barack and I were elected and we inherited the worst recession short of a depression in history. The president put me in charge of the Recovery Act, $800 billion. It was needed to save our economy from going into depression. We did it with less than two-tenths of 1% waste or fraud. We were able to see to it that Ohio and other states received substantial assistance to address their economic pain and recover and rebuild, to make sure we kept teachers, firefighters, and cops, public nurses on the job. People are being laid off now because you don't have the local money to do it.

 
So they didn't have to be fired because of lack of money. That was the federal government stepped up, and it started the longest sustained economic recovery in American history that this guy inherited and then squandered again. But you know what Mitch McConnell said recently about helping the states and cities. He said, quote, "Let them go bankrupt." Well, I heard that before. You heard it, too. Republicans said the same thing about the automobile industry.

 
Like I said, I come from an automobile state, an automobile man. The auto industry that supported one in eight Ohioans was on the brink. It was more than ten years ago, but you remember like it was yesterday. It was on the brink. But Barack and I bet on you and the American worker, and it paid off. I argued the American worker was the finest auto worker in the world. Management screwed it up. You didn't. You didn't make the mistake. By the way, it all got paid back. But guess who made the greatest sacrifices? Auto workers. You made the sacrifices to get it back.

 
So it's over the many objections of many that we stepped in and rescued the automobile industry, General Motors and Chrysler, saving one million jobs. Then what happened when Donald Trump came to office? Remember what Trump said in 2017 in Lordstown? He said, "Don't move," quote, "Don't move. Don't sell your house." But Lordstown shut down on Trump's watch.

 
After a decade in Cleveland, after the debate in Cleveland, I met with an elementary school teacher in Lordstown. Her husband was there as well, one of the workers who lost his job in Lordstown. He had to accept a transfer to a plan in Kentucky, eight hours away, one way, to maintain his healthcare and his pension. He drives 16 hours a weekend to see her and their two kids.

 
But Donald Trump's betrayal doesn't stop there. He betrayed union workers at Goodyear when he called for a boycott of buying Goodyear tires because of a personal grudge. He passed a tax bill for the super wealthy corporations that actually provided incentives for companies to move jobs overseas.

 
Folks, manufacturing is the backbone of America. But we're in a manufacturing recession because of Donald Trump even before the COVID virus hit. We're down 647,000 manufacturing jobs nationwide since the crisis started, and our balance of payments, meaning we're sending more overseas than coming to us. I mean, we're buying more overseas than we're selling, is higher than it's been a long time. There's still 10,900 lost auto worker manufacturing jobs in Ohio that did not come back. The Trump presidency will be the first presidency since Herbert Hoover over 90 years ago, first president of modern history to leave office with fewer jobs than he had when he came to office.

 
Donald Trump's only plan is more tax cuts for the wealthy. Most of you, if you still have a job, paid more than he paid last year in taxes. $750? Come on. The system's rigged. We've got to change it. $30 billion, a new proposal, just for the gains of the 100 richest billionaires in America, 30 billion. Hear me? They made $30 billion alone in this year, while the rest of the people were getting killed.

 
In the middle of this pandemic, why do Republicans have time to hold a hearing on the Supreme Court instead of providing the significant economic need for localities? I'll tell you why. It's about finally getting his wish to wipe out the Affordable Healthcare Act, because their nominee has said in the past that the law should be struck down. His relentless effort to eliminate the Affordable Care Act that provided healthcare coverage for 20 million people who didn't have it, protections for well over 100 million people with pre-existing conditions. We've seen his pledge, quote, "to terminate the tax dedicated to financing Social Security."

 
Marcy and I were talking about that. You know what the actuary at the Social Security Department said? If it goes through, this tax, he's talking about, cut on Social Security, it will actually bankrupt, bankrupt Social Security by the middle of 2023. Go home and tell your parents that.

 
 

 
Check it out. First president I can ever remember, in the middle of a national economic crisis, did not try to call the parties together. He turned his back on you. I promise you I will never do that.

 
Folks, that's why my Build Back Better plan is built around a simple concept. It's time to reward work, not wealth, work. I mean it. An independent analysis by a big Wall Street firm called Moody's, not a Democratic think tank, they did an analysis of my economic plan to revive this country and an analysis of his. Here's what they concluded: that my plan will create 18.6 million jobs in the next four years, 7 million, more than the president's economic plan. It would generate economic growth, an additional trillion dollars more than the president's plan. Look, what these guys don't get is when you do well, when my family does well, everybody does better. Everybody does better. That's the God's truth.

 
Here's how my plan works. I'm not going to raise taxes on anyone who makes less than $400,000 a year. If you make more than 400, beep your horn, because you're going to get a tax raise. Well, I'm going to raise your tax slightly if you're making over 400. But look, you're not going to pay a penny more. In fact, tens of millions of middle class families are going to get a tax cut when they need it most for raising their kids, trying to get affordable healthcare, buying their first home, or saving for retirement.

 
But I'm going to ask big corporations and the super wealthy just to begin to start to pay their fair share. I'm going to raise back tax cut he gave for corporate America. They were paying the mid thirties. They're now paying 21. If we just raise the tax back to what it should be, 28%, that generates over $100 billion. Hear me? That's money. I mean, excuse me, $1.3 trillion. That's what it raises to help hardworking folks, to allow us to invest in work and people and grow the middle class and make sure everybody comes along this time. My plan will create a million good-paying union jobs, manufacturing and building products and technology that we need now and in the future. We're not investing in research.

 
It starts with a pretty basic idea. The federal government every year spent $600 billion just making sure that we have ships and planes, cars, trains, all the things the government lets contracts for. Well, I promise you this. Every single product, every single contract let will be only let to a company or a firm that makes it in America from beginning to end. Not a joke. It's going to be used to buy American products, support American jobs. We'll invest to build more resilient infrastructure, roads, bridges, ports, 1.5 million new affordable housing units, high-speed broadband in every American household, more important than ever. We're going to rebuild crumbling schools, retrofit four million buildings, and weatherize two million homes, creating one million new jobs, the reason why everyone from the electrical works and every other major union is strongly supporting us. It's all going to be done by certified union labor. Promise.

 
You may remember when the president put me in charge of that $800 billion, not one single contract went out that wasn't prevailing wage, not one. So we're going to end Trump's new incentive for sending jobs abroad. That's what he's done. More jobs are going abroad now. Any company that offshores a job is going to pay a 10% penalty. Any company that brings back a job, reopens a closed factory, like a manufacturing plant, they'll get a 10% credit for their investment. We're going to make trade strategy that fights for every American worker and every American job and actually get results, not Trump's chaotic trade war, erratic tweets, and bluster that's only stiffed American workers and consumers, including farmers. He's let you down. He's let us down.

 
I promise you I will stand up to China's trade abuses, and I will invest in the American worker, because I know no one, nobody can outcompete an American worker when they've gotten a fair shot, nobody in the world.

 
One more thing: The United States government owns and maintains an enormous fleet of vehicles. We're going to convert many of them to electric vehicles, and you're going to still need to build these transmissions for a long time to come. But any new jobs in that area are going to go to people who are in the automobile industry, who are in the manufacturing, who are in the UAW are going to be making these new vehicles, sourced right here in America. The government will provide and demand support to retool factories that are struggling to compete. The US auto industry will step up. I'll expand capacity so the United States, not China leads the world in modern new technology.

 
We're going to make it easier for American consumers to move to the vehicles of the future by building a network of 500,000 charging stations across the country. We're offering consumers rebates to swap older fuel-efficient cars. We're going to move in a direction that technology is taking us and making sure UAW leads the way in how we do it. Together, this will mean one million good new jobs in the auto industry.

 
Folks, it's an example of how we can do anything. I'm more optimistic about what we have a chance to do in the next four to six years, eight years, than anything anytime in my whole career. The blinders have been taken off the American people. They see what the combination of the pandemic, the economic crisis, the racial inequality refacing, and what's going on internationally, and they're ready to step up. They know we have to change.

 
Nothing, nothing, nothing is beyond the capacity of the United States of America, and I mean that. Think about it. We're the only country in the world that's come out of every crisis stronger than we went in because of who we are. As I've said to other world leaders, never underestimate the American people. There's no quit in America. There's none. In America, we can do anything that we need to do if we can do it together. Nothing can stop us.

 
We have to come together. That's why I'm running. I ran as a proud Democrat for the Senate. I had run as a proud Democrat for Vice President, and I'm running as a proud Democrat for President. But I promise you this. I will govern as an American president. I'll govern for every one who voted for me, as well as against me. We can be better than what we've seen. We can be what we are at our best, the United States of America. So vote. Vote. Visit iwill.com/ohio. God bless you. God bless the auto workers. God protect. Thank you. Which way am I going?

 
… a widow and a dear friend of an American hero, John McCain. We also saw the resilience and the goodness of decency of the American people. They're not looking for a handout, they just want a fair shot. My dad used to have an expression when he lost his job up in Scranton. When I was in grade school, my dad would say, and we had to move in with my grandparents. When he went down south from Scranton to Wilmington, Delaware looking for a job. And he used to always say that, "The fact is Joey, I'm not looking for government to solve my problems but I hope like hell they can at least understand my problems." He finally got a job, we could afford to buy a small home. He worked hard to build a decent middle class life. It wasn't easy for him, but he had an expression.

 
As I said, a job joy about a lot more than a paycheck. It's about your dignity. It's about respect. It's about your place in the community. It's being uable to look your kidney eye and say, "Honey, it's going to be okay." You deserve a president who understands what you're going through. Who sees you where you are and where you want to be. The last thing you need is a president who ignores you, looks down upon you, who just doesn't understand who in God's name we are. That's President Trump. His reckless personal conduct since his diagnosis. The destabilizing effect it's having on our government is unconscionable. He didn't take the necessary precautions to protect himself or others. And the longer Donald Trump is President, the more reckless he gets. How can we trust him to protect this country?

 
Governor, you've seen how he picks fights with states and pits them against one another. Look, what's happened. More than 210,000 Americans are dead. 420,000 have been hospitalized. We lose anywhere from 700 to a thousand people every single day in America, worse than any country in the world. More than 7.5 million Americans have been infected. And we're still counting. And here in Nevada, there have been more than 82,000 cases in total. More than 1,600 deaths. 80% of those deaths have been seniors over 60 years of age. Black, Latino, Asian American, Native-American communities are especially hit hard. Nationally, the infection rate among Latinos is almost three times higher than that of white non-Latinos and the death rate as well as three times higher. More than 40,000 Latinos have died from COVID-19. My heart goes out to all those families who got up this morning and there was an empty chair around the kitchen table. Or go to dinner tonight and the person that should be there is gone.

 
They've lost part of their soul. They've lost part of their life. It's all about family. With you and I it's all about family. Losing family is a devastating thing. We can do so much better. My heart goes out to everyone struggling with the economic crisis caused by the neglect, the simple neglect of this President. Nearly 11 million jobs lost since the beginning of this crisis. And they still haven't come back, including 136,000 jobs here in Nevada. Temporary layoffs have turned to permanent layoffs. Record growth last month and a number of Americans facing long-term unemployment. And the problem of long-term unemployment, once you get beyond a certain point, history shows us that they never get a job again.

 
All told, there are now 30 million workers who either lost hours, lost paychecks, or lost their jobs entirely. Roughly 700,000 people have dropped out of the labor force last month. And the vast majority were women. We're still down 647,000 manufacturing jobs nationwide since the crisis has started. And our balance of payments deficit is going up. And here in Nevada, the unemployment rate is 13.2%, the highest in the nation because of President Trump's negligence. The hospitality industry has hit particularly hard. The culinary union, has recently said publicly that 50% of their members are still out of work. Tourism in June was down 70% from a year ago. The result? President Trump will be the first president in modern history since Hoover to leave office with fewer jobs than he had when he came into office. Here in Nevada, after seeing over 200,000 jobs created in the last seven years of the Obama-Biden administration, Nevada has actually seen jobs go down under the Trump presidency. He's leaving us with what he calls, he says is a V-shape recession.

 
It's a K-shaped recession where those at the top keep going up and the middle-class and everyone else keeps going down, getting worse. Means essential workers who sacrificed to keep us going through this pandemic are being left behind by the most unequal recovery in modern history. You get this, the top 100 billionaires in America have done pretty well. Just in the pandemic, the top 100 billionaires have made an additional $300 billion, top 100. But you get the bottom half of that K and it's a downward slide. You're left to figure out how you're going to pay your bills, put food on the table. So much food insecurity in America, in this state. How to balance doing your job with being a teacher for your kids because of the negligence of the President, they can't go back to school because they haven't provided the wherewithal for schools to open.

 
You're asked to risk your neck because you can't work from home where the risk of COVID are kept outside. That's because you're a police officer, a firefighter, a nurse, or you're working on an assembly line in customer service or a checkout counter, or here in Vegas in hospitality. If you're a housekeeper, a casino worker, the ones who built this very stage. Governor Sisolak, your members of Congress are doing everything they possibly can to help turn things around. Governor, you've been focused and responsible. You followed science and put public health and safety. You made tough calls that saved lives. Working around the clock so we can reopen schools and the economy safely. Your members of Congress, have done the same.

 
And the House passed what they call the HEROES Act months ago. Would have provided billions of dollars to help states keep first responders on the job. The safety measures needed, the PPP needed to open our schools and businesses but Donald Trump and Mitch McConnell, Republican leader did nothing to move the legislation. Nothing in June, nothing in July, nothing in August, nothing in September, things getting worse and worse and worse. And as people struggled and suffered, what did they focus on? If this wasn't so serious, you'd think I'm making it up. What they focused on is more tax cuts for the wealthy, not a joke. They're proposal adds another $30 billion tax cut for millionaires and billionaires. Cuts in funding. Cutting the means by which we fund the Social Security system, leading the actuary of Social Security to say if they do it, by 2023, mid-2023, there'll be no money for Social Security.

 
And a relentless effort to eliminate, as Alejandro said, the Affordable Care Act, which provides healthcare coverage for 22 million people, over 100 million with pre-existing conditions. This is going on at the same time he's already cost 10 million people their health insurance because their companies have gone bankrupt. It's unconscionable. Instead of focusing on our needs, your needs, he's trying to take your healthcare away. He's literally before the Supreme Court as I speak to strike down the entire Affordable Care Act, take away that healthcare for 20 million Americans. That's 282,000 Nevadans. Take away federal protections for preexisting conditions, 1.2 million Nevadans. And complications from COVID like lung scarring and heart damage could well become the next pre-existing condition. Striking down the Affordable Care Act would toss out the rule that allows our children to be covered on their parents' insurance policy until age 26. Take us backward when insurance companies could change a woman more for healthcare than a man for the same procedure, just because she's a woman. Take away Medicare benefits for seniors. Increase their drug prescription costs.

 
And just as he vowed to "terminate" as I said earlier the funding for Social Security. The idea that in just a few years could put at risk 410,000 Nevadans that rely on a dignified retirement because of Social Security. And during all this, not once did President Trump call a high-level meeting of Democrats and Republicans to the White House to resolve these issues. I've served with a lot of presidents, never, no matter how good or bad you thought they were did they fail to try to bring parties together in the White House to reach a settlement. You know why? He spent so much time hiding in the bunker in the White House or on the bunker of his golf course, playing hundreds of rounds of golf.

 
And then this Tuesday, what'd he do? He said, "End the discussions." He wasn't even starting them. No more negotiations. No more negotiations. And now today he says, "Well, I'm back." One thing for sure, Donald Trump shows no urgency to deliver hardworking Americans, like the family I grew up in. Like all of you. What they need now desperately. For exactly two months since the emergency small business program that your congresspeople voted, for has closed down two months of small business owners in Nevada and across the country, waiting, hoping, for just a little extra help to be able to stay open. Now we have more than 400,000 small businesses have been permanently closed.

 
By the way, the largest employers in America are small businesses. Millions more are struggling to hang on. How many more will go under? How many more dreams will be extinguished because of the selfishness of this President and the Republican leaders in Congress? Make no mistake, if you're out of work, if your business is closed, if your child's school was shut down, if you're facing eviction, as millions are, over 20 million Americans worry about whether they're going to be able to pay their mortgage next month. None of that seems to matter to Donald Trump. You're a firefighter, police officer, who depends on state and local budgets. He's turned his back on you as well, because they've got to balance their budgets. They're being laid off all over America.

 
When Barack and I were elected, we inherited the worst recession short of the Great Depression in history. He put me in charge of what's called the Recovery Act. $800 billion. We passed and needed to get out into the economy within 18 months to prevent a depression. We did it with less than two tenths percent of waste or fraud. And I was able to see to it that the states in order to keep moving, keep teachers, firefighters, first responders, all employed. I was able to get $140 billion in aid out to the states. Right here in Clark County, I was able to bring to $1.2 billion to keep your economy going. We have that ability now.

 
The House has already passed a similar piece of legislation. And we started the longest sustained recovery in American history. But you know what Mitch McConnell said about help with the states. I'm not making this up. He said, "Let them go bankrupt. Let them go bankrupt." What in the hell is he talking about? Folks, we're so much better than this. We can turn this crisis into progress. We contain this virus and fully reopen our economy. We make up 4% of the world's population and we have 20% of the world's deaths. If we just follow the science, expand testing and tracing, social distance, washing our hands, implementing nationwide mask mandates. Don't politicize the race for a vaccine, Mr. President. Just have a plan for safe and equitable distribution.

 
On the economy, bring the Congress back together to pass real relief to help people who've lost their unemployment checks as well. And then implement a comprehensive agenda that I've laid out to make bold investments so we can build back better. He keeps talking about the Republicans. Some Republicans, a lot of them are acknowledging and supporting me, but a lot of them also are talking about, "Well, Biden's going to spend all this money." Well, guess what? The independent analysis put out by Moody's, a Wall Street firm did a detailed analysis of my recovery plan and the President's. And here's what they said, it's off of Wall Street, that my plan will create 18.6 million jobs in four years. 7 million more jobs than the President's plan. And $1 trillion more in economic growth than the President's plan.

 
Democrats know how to get things done. Here's how my plan works. It's not going to raise a penny in tax for anyone making less than $400,000 a year. Not a penny. And how am I going to pay for all this? I'm going to ask the big corporations and the wealthy to start paying their fair share. You realize that the Fortune 500 companies, 92 of them making billions of dollars, don't pay a single penny in taxes. It's wrong. Donald Trump paying $720 in taxes? Come on. The money we raise by eliminating the $1.3 trillion of his $2 trillion tax cut that affects the super wealthy and corporations, we're going to invest in working people. We're going to grow the middle class to make sure everyone's included on the deal.

 
The kinds of investment that will stimulate the economy, including industries like tourism and hospitality. To get back to full employment fast and help build back better than before. It means the analysis shows creating millions of good paying union jobs. Manufacturing and technology. Making sure our future is made in America. We and the President in the White House gives out $600 billion in contracts per year. Well guess what? While I'm President, it's going to go to no outfit that doesn't make it in America, the whole thing, and sell it in America. I mean it.

 
And infrastructure. Building roads, bridges, highways, ports, airports, and clean energy. Upgrading four million buildings and weatherizing, two million homes, creating at least a million good paying jobs in the process. Making the climate safer, saving hundreds of millions of barrels of oil. We'll deal with climate change by creating millions of union jobs that build a climate resilience of our cities and our towns fighting back stronger, more frequent wildfires. Beating heat waves, droughts, hurricanes, and floods. By the way, did you hear what the President said about hurricanes this summer? He was told about how they're coming across the warm water in the Atlantic and the closer they get to the shore, the worse they get. You know what he said, Alejandro? He said, "Maybe we should drop an atomic weapon on them and blow them up." As we say in my religion, "Bless me father for I have sinned." What's going on here?

 
Under my plan, small business come out the other side of this crisis with access to capital and the ability to deal with their debts. We're going to get $50 billion in new capital, especially for minority owned businesses and small businesses. We're going to make another hundred billion dollars in low-interest loans available to these businesses, creating jobs, increasing economic growth and increasing incomes. A $15 minimum wage. I'm dreaming here. But a $15 minimum wage for our essential workers. We're not just going to praise you, we're going to pay you with a good wage. Ensure you have strong benefits. We'll ease the burden of the major cost in your life. We'll build the Affordable Care Act, writing knew health insurance options, not for-profit public options, which give private insurers a real competitor. We're going to increase subsidies for premiums and lower your costs. Increase plans that will lower deductibles and lower out of pocket expenses. And we're going to take on the pharmaceutical industry with a plan that will slash costs of prescription drugs by 50%.

 
The reason I'm not going to more detail, you've been out here a long time, let's give me one example. If in fact Medicare is able to negotiate for all the drugs they buy and say you're not going to be able to sell them to them unless you pay the price we're suggesting, that would drop by 60% the cost the cost of drugs.

 
We'll also make high quality childcare available and accessible. We'll work with the states to ensure that every three, four year old will get access to free, high quality preschool. Not, not, not daycare. We're going to make sure low and middle income families never have to spend more than 7% of their income to care for young children. Because if we truly want to reward work in this country, we have to ease the financial burdens that created the care for families that are caring for raising a child and an aging loved one. Look at the professional caregivers out there, home health care workers, childcare workers, who are more often women. Women of color immigrants, are too often underpaid, under seen and undervalued. That's why my Build Back Better plan will elevate the compensation, benefits and dignity of caregiving workers and early childhood educators. We're also going to triple the funding for Title I schools like the one behind me here, which served high number of children from low-income families.

 
We're going to make four years of public college and universities tuition free for any family that makes less than $125,000 a year. We're going to make community college and job training programs free for all hardworking Americans that qualify. And if you're buying your first home, we're going to provide a $15,000 tax credit to help you get there. We're going to protect Social Security. Increase benefits for millions of seniors. Look, I'm not going to lay it out, but go to joebiden.com. Go to Moody's, look it up. We pay for all this and we grow the economy at the same time.

 
The fact is, President of the United States can only see the world from Park Avenue. He thinks Wall Street built this country and CEOs. I see the world from where I grew up in Scranton, Pennsylvania and Claymont. Communities like some that you live in. I know the middle-class working people built this country. The measure of economic success has been what our families are talking about around the kitchen table. Are you able to look your kid in the eye and say, "Honey, it's going to be okay?"

 
How many times do you know somebody… This morning I had to say, look, I know those tires are bald, but you got to ride on them for another 20,000 miles. We just don't have the money. We just can't do it now." Who's going to tell her she can't go back to school because we can't continue to borrow the money to keep her in that community college? There was a discussion that took place around my table and I'm sure yours as well. But if we're going to get anything done, we got to come together.

 
I made a speech I worked really, really hard on and thought really hard about before I made it in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, on the battlefield last week. I said at that time that we're facing a crisis, not unlike we did after Gettysburg. I said there that I'm running as a proud Democrat, but I'm going to govern as an American president. The work is hard for those who don't support me as those who do, because after all this country has been through, after all that America has accomplished, after all the years, we stood as a beacon of light to the world we cannot be that here and now, in 2020, we allow the government, the government of the people, by the people, and for the people, to perish from this earth.

 
Folks, we have it our hands. And I made this in the bottom of heart, we have in our hands the ultimate power. And what's the ultimate power in a democracy? The power to vote. Here in Nevada, the best thing you can do is vote early and return your ballot quickly. Ballots here in Clark County were mailed two days ago, on Wednesday. You can return your ballot by mail. You can drop it off at a drop box or vote in person during the early vote or on election day. But just make a plan. Seriously, go to iwillvote.com/nv. Make a plan. Don't risk any delays, return that mail and ballot as soon as you can. Make sure your voice is heard.

 
We can be better than what we've seen. We can be what we are at our best, the United States of America. I'm confident we can bring Democrats and Republicans together again with him gone. Folks, conclude by saying there has never, ever, ever been anything the United States has been unable to accomplish when we've done it together. Never, never, never. So folks let's stand up and vote and take back this country now. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Appreciate it. (silence)
